Blog: How we built mobile replay (#9376)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/mobile-session-replay.md

---
title: How we built mobile replay (and why it took so long)
date: 2024-10-08
author:
 - ian-vanagas
 - manoel-aranda-neto
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >- 
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
 - Guides
---

> [Session replay](/session-replay) is one of the most powerful tools for understanding user behavior. Web session replay has been a core part of PostHog for a long time now (it was built in our first hackathon), but mobile teams have had to wait longer.
> 
> Finally, it's here on [iOS](/docs/session-replay/ios), [Android](/docs/session-replay/android), and [React Native](/docs/session-replay/react-native) (with [Flutter](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-flutter/issues/69) coming soon). 
> 
> What took so long? Recording them in mobile apps is much trickier than in web apps. This post goes over why and how we finally managed to make it happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web session replay has been a core part of PostHog since our first hackathon way back in [insert year/date + link about it if we have one], but we only released our first betas for mobile apps in [xxx] this year.

Why the long wait? 

1. It made sense for us to focus mainly on web-based B2B customers during our early-stage phase.

2. We shipped a whole suite of products, including feature flags, experiments, surveys and (more recently) our own data warehouse.

3. Building reliable and useful replay for mobile apps is way harder than web.

Happily, after several months of hard work from Manoel and the replay team, we have free-to-use betas for [iOS](/docs/session-replay/ios), [Android](/docs/session-replay/android), and [React Native](/docs/session-replay/react-native), with [Flutter](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-flutter/issues/69) coming soon. 

This post covers how it works and some the technical challenges we overcame it make it.
```

Bit of a rework:
- Didn't love the opening line, which felt a bit puffy for an engineering blog.
- Please fill in the blanks, but there was a lack of context around timescales.
- Adding more context for the wait beyond "it's hard". There were business reasons, too.

## What's so difficult about mobile session replay?

> Developers have complained about [the lack of good mobile replay options](https://medium.com/goodones/15-years-later-there-is-still-no-good-session-replay-for-ios-f8d335999737). Why is that the case?

Reviewer: Rather than just linking to the source, we should summarize the common complaints – e.g. the stuff they talk about, pricing, etc. I feel like I need to read that article to understand the context.

### 1. Multiple platforms

> The industry's big secret about web session replay is that it largely relies on a single open source library to work: [rrweb](https://github.com/rrweb-io/rrweb). It includes tools for recording web interactions and state changes, structuring session data, and playback. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The industry's big secret about web session replay is that it largely relies on a single open-source library to work: [rrweb](https://github.com/rrweb-io/rrweb). It includes tools for recording web interactions and state changes, structuring session data, and playback. 
```

Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, we needed to do all the work ourselves, and this was a lot. Instead of a single JavaScript SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, React Native, and Flutter). 

There are even breaking differences within platforms. For example, Jetpack Compose uses a compositional model for UI, which is different from Android's traditional view-based model. This means you need to develop separate ways of doing replays when using it. iOS has a similar problem with SwiftUI versus UIKit.

### 2. Performance

Phones are much less powerful than desktops. Because of this, we need to be much more sensitive about performance. 

If you've ever tried to record your phone screen, you would know its impact on performance. Apps take longer to load, animations become choppy, reactivity degrades, and your phone heats up.

> Anything that degrades your user experience is not an option for many developers.

Reviewer: This could do with a bit more caveating and context. Something about how the vast majority of phones aren't top-of-the-range iPhones. Your app needs to work just as well on $150 Android phone as a $1,500 iPhone 16 etc. That screen recording example is not universally true, so probably not a great example.

### 3. Privacy

To protect users privacy, developers often mask and exclude sensitive information. The tricky part of this is identifying what information is sensitive.

Web apps rely on the DOM to do this. The DOM provides a hierarchical tree structure that represents and uniquely identifies elements. The web also has standardized elements, like `<input type="password">`. Combining these makes it easier to identify, mask, and exclude sensitive elements on the web.

Mobile doesn't have standardized structures or elements. Accessibility identifiers are also inconsistently implemented. This means identifying, masking, and excluding content is a lot trickier.

> ### 4. Testing

Reviewer: Bit of nit, but this more of an "us" problem than a general reason why building mobile replay is hard.

Author: I think everyone who doesn't have a mobile app and is developing session replay will have this problem, but reworded

This meant that during development we relied on demo and open source apps. This risks creating something that doesn't work well for larger, production-quality apps.

Developing a high-quality mobile replay product means relying more on our users and their feedback.

## How we solved these problems

### 1. Multiple platforms

The solution to this problem is plastered on motivation posters everywhere: **do the work** (to develop for each platform).

The one thing that made this easier was reusing our existing session replay infrastructure. This included the data structure, the way to store replays, as well as a complete product for playback and analysis.

![Replay](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/replay_03a8c56981.png)

The first platform-specific work we did was rewriting the SDKs in Kotlin and Swift, removing code we didn't use, improving tests, automating deployments, and making sure they worked with the latest platforms.

Once updated, we could get on with the work developing platform-specific proof-of-concepts.

### 2. Performance

Not slowing down people's apps was core to our mission with session replay. 

> To do this, we decided to focus on capturing wireframes instead of screenshots. Although we built both in the end, wireframe mode is much less performance-intensive, meaning it is the mode users prefer.

Reviewer: can we quantify this? how big is the difference?

Author: Checking: https://posthog.slack.com/archives/C03PB072FMJ/p1728422422040949

There are more challenges to solve, specifically around [SwiftUI](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-ios/issues/162) and Jetpack Compose, since the way they transpile code causes the representation to not be a 1:1 match and properties are lost.

### 4. Testing

We solved the testing problem in 3 key ways:

1. **Building testing tools:** <TeamMember name="Paul D'Ambra" /> and <TeamMember name="Manoel Aranda Neto"/> wanted to keep the rrweb schema for mobile replay to ensure the fewest changes possible to our API and player. To do this, they wrote a [validation and testing tool](https://github.com/PostHog/mobile-replay-data-transformer) to rapidly test the transformations before deploying it in our main app.

2. **Using open source apps:** The team found a [list of open source apps](https://github.com/pcqpcq/open-source-android-apps) they could test with. This helped find issues, support more edge cases, and build test coverage.

3. **Testing in production:** Luckily, mobile replay had massive demand. We could rely on our users to test in production and give us feedback. We recruited users from the public issues for mobile replay, sales conversations, and existing mobile SDK users.

> ## Making mobile session replay available for everyone

Reviewer: Could we have a recording of what an actual mobile replay looks like now? Would really help sell how the feature looks and feels now.

 - manoel-aranda-netos
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
 - Guides
---

[Session replay](/session-replay) is one of the most powerful tools for understanding user behavior. Web session replay has been a core part of PostHog for a long time now (it was built in our first hackathon), but mobile teams have had to wait longer.

Fortunately, it's finally here on [iOS](/docs/session-replay/ios) and [Android](/docs/session-replay/android) (with [React Native](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/13269) and [Flutter](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-flutter/issues/69) coming soon). 

What took so long? Although we had the structure to ingest and playback replays, recording them in mobile apps is much trickier than in web apps. This post goes over why and how we finally managed to overcome them.

## What's so difficult about mobile session replay

Others have complained about [the lack of good mobile replay options](https://medium.com/goodones/15-years-later-there-is-still-no-good-session-replay-for-ios-f8d335999737). Why is that the case?

> ### 1. Multiple platforms

Reviewer 2: Not sure if it makes sense to mention but the Android and iOS SDKs were rewritten before starting session replay for mobile

Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, we needed to do all the work ourselves, and when compared to the web, this is a lot of work. This is because, instead of a single JavaScript library, language, and SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, and React Native). 

There are even breaking differences within platforms. For example, Jetpack Compose uses a compositional model for UI, different from Android's traditional view-based model. This means you need to develop separate ways of doing replays when using it. iOS has a similar problem with SwiftUI.

### 2. Performance

Desktops are a lot more powerful than phones. Because of this, we need to be much more sensitive about performance. 

If you've ever tried to record your phone screen, you would know its impact on performance. Apps take longer to load, animations become choppy, reactivity degrades, and your phone heats up.

Any that degrades the experience this much is not an option for many developers.

### 3. Privacy

A big difference between web and mobile apps is the DOM. 

> In web apps, this provides a hierarchical tree structure that represents and uniquely identifies elements. The web also has standardized elements, like `<input type="password">`. Combining these makes it easier to identify, mask, and exclude sensitive elements on the web.

Reviewer 2: Probably worth pointing out also the DOM observer used by rrweb, which doesn't exist in Mobile either

Author: I'll add this earlier

2. **Testing:** Use open source and test apps to develop a proof of concept. Once complete, use our large user base to find users willing to test our prototype. Luckily, this feature had massive demand and there were users who were willing to try the earliest versions of it.

The other two have more clever solutions. 

### 1. Performance

Not slowing down people's apps was core to our mission with session replay. 

Our strategy to do wireframes was much less performance-intensive than others tools' reliance on screenshots. We still built screenshot mode, which provided a more accurate representation, but mostly focused on making our wireframe mode as good as possible. 

![Screenshot vs Wireframe](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/wireframe_78ce94bd4b.png)

Many performance issues users faced were either caused by screenshot mode or unsupported data being captured. Both of these were solved by making wireframe mode better.

On top of this, we try to offload as much work to our servers as possible. For example, the transformation to the rrweb schema happens on the server side. 

> ### 2. Privacy

Reviewer 2: There are still a few challenges here, eg https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-ios/issues/162 or https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-ios/issues/163
Mostly around Jetpack compose and SwiftUI since the way how they transpile the code, the representation isn't a 1:1 match, and a few properties are lost.

As for privacy, we built the ability to mask all text inputs and images as well as redact certain views with `ph-no-capture` like this:

<MultiLanguage>

```xml
<ImageView
    android:id="@+id/imvProfilePhoto"
    android:layout_width="200dp"
    android:layout_height="200dp"
    android:tag="ph-no-capture"
/>
```

```swift
let imvProfilePhoto = UIImageView(frame: CGRect(x: 50, y: 50, width: 100, height: 100))
imvProfilePhoto.accessibilityIdentifier = "ph-no-capture"
```

</MultiLanguage>

We added this functionality on both wireframe and screenshot mode. Although as nice as it would have been to have automatic masking like we do on the web, the ability to have masking at all enables privacy-sensitive teams to actually use replay. 

## Making mobile session replay available for everyone

Because mobile replay shares pricing with web replays, PostHog now offers the most generous free tier for mobile replays on the market. Where mobile replay was once a tool only available for large enterprise plans, now anyone can get 5000 replays for free every month.

> This enables us to help more developers have the tools they need to build successful products.

Reviewer 2: Mobile session replay is still free while in beta, the goal is to launch and charge for recordings during the Q4.
We still have to run the analysis costs since the screenshot mode might store much more data, and then we will decide if the price is gonna be the same as the web or not.

## Further reading

- [The 80/20 of early-stage startup analytics](/founders/early-stage-analytics)
- [We decided to make session replay cheaper](/blog/session-replay-pricing)

> - [How to set up Android session replay](/tutorials/android-session-replay) and [How to set up iOS session replay](/tutorials/ios-session-replay)

Reviewer 2: We can add the RN page

Author: Don't have that one yet 😅

Reviewer 2: oh true that, we can link to https://posthog.com/docs/session-replay/react-native for now? but yeah its not a tutorial

---
title: How we built mobile replay (and why it took so long)
date: 2024-10-04
author:
 - ian-vanagas
 - manoel-aranda-neto
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >- 
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
 - Guides
---

[Session replay](/session-replay) is one of the most powerful tools for understanding user behavior. Web session replay has been a core part of PostHog for a long time now (it was built in our first hackathon), but mobile teams have had to wait longer.

> Fortunately, it's finally here on [iOS](/docs/session-replay/ios), [Android](/docs/session-replay/android), and [React Native](/docs/session-replay/react-native) (with [Flutter](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-flutter/issues/69) coming soon). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, it's here on [iOS](/docs/session-replay/ios), [Android](/docs/session-replay/android), and [React Native](/docs/session-replay/react-native) (with [Flutter](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-flutter/issues/69) coming soon). 
```

> What took so long? Although we had the structure to ingest and playback replays, recording them in mobile apps is much trickier than in web apps. This post goes over why and how we finally managed to overcome them.

Reviewer 3: Just tightening the intro a bit
```suggestion
What took so long? Recording them in mobile apps is much trickier than in web apps. This post goes over why and how we finally managed to overcome them.
```

## What's so difficult about mobile session replay?

> Others have complained about [the lack of good mobile replay options](https://medium.com/goodones/15-years-later-there-is-still-no-good-session-replay-for-ios-f8d335999737). Why is that the case?

Reviewer 3: We can also say "people" instead of develoeprs
```suggestion
Developers have complained about [the lack of good mobile replay options](https://medium.com/goodones/15-years-later-there-is-still-no-good-session-replay-for-ios-f8d335999737). Why is that the case?
```

### 1. Multiple platforms

The industry's big secret about web session replay is that it largely relies on a single open source library to work: [rrweb](https://github.com/rrweb-io/rrweb). It includes tools for recording web interactions and state changes, structuring session data, and playback. 

> Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, we needed to do all the work ourselves, and when compared to the web, this is a lot. Instead of a single JavaScript SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, React Native, and Flutter). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, we needed to do all the work ourselves, and this was a lot! Instead of a single JavaScript SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, React Native, and Flutter). 
```

There are even breaking differences within platforms. For example, Jetpack Compose uses a compositional model for UI, which is different from Android's traditional view-based model. This means you need to develop separate ways of doing replays when using it. iOS has a similar problem with SwiftUI versus UIKit.

### 2. Performance

Phones are much less powerful than desktops. Because of this, we need to be much more sensitive about performance. 

If you've ever tried to record your phone screen, you would know its impact on performance. Apps take longer to load, animations become choppy, reactivity degrades, and your phone heats up.

Anything that degrades your user experience is not an option for many developers.

### 3. Privacy

> A big difference between web and mobile apps is the DOM. 

Reviewer 3: There's a bit of a mismatch between the heading here and the first sentence. I was confused to read about the DOM. I think we need to reworking the headnig, but Im not sure what a better suggestion is

In web apps, this provides a hierarchical tree structure that represents and uniquely identifies elements. The web also has standardized elements, like `<input type="password">`. Combining these makes it easier to identify, mask, and exclude sensitive elements on the web.

Mobile doesn't have standardized structures or elements. Accessibility identifiers are also inconsistently implemented. This means identifying, masking, and excluding content is a lot trickier.

### 4. Testing

We're big fans of [dogfooding](/product-engineers/dogfooding) at PostHog. Often, we are our own best users, but we don't have a mobile app. 

This meant that during development we relied on demo and open source apps. This risks creating something that doesn't work well for larger, production-quality apps.

Developing a high-quality mobile replay product means relying more on our users and their feedback.

> ## Solving mobile session replay's big problems
> 
> Here's how we tackled all four of these:
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How we solved these problems

```

### 1. Multiple platforms

> We took a simple approach to solving this problem: do the work to develop for each platform.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit dry. Can we make it wittier/more interesting?

"We took a simple approach to solving this problem: do the damn work for each platform."

Once this was working, we worked to capture standard Android components like radios, checkboxes, Calendar, [Toggle](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/19279), and RatingBar. Many of them required custom transformation and components to render properly. For example, radio buttons didn't group, padding wasn't applied, and positioning was wrong.

Beyond this, fitting the data into a service meant for the web caused many challenges. For example, click events weren't showing even though the types and data were the same as the web data. After investigation, we found that rrweb expects touch events to be associated with specific elements. Setting the ID to the `body` element was enough to fix it.

Once we got consistent and useful results from what we built, we recruited our first test users and iterated from there. Later, we followed a similar process for [iOS](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-ios/pull/115).

Beyond our focus on wireframe mode, the biggest performance improvements came from getting mobile replay into the hands of our users. We found and solved multiple performance issues thanks to their feedback.

### 3. Privacy

> As for privacy, we built the ability to mask all text inputs and images as well as redact certain views with `ph-no-capture` like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As for privacy, we built the ability to mask all text inputs and images as well as redact certain views by adding `ph-no-capture` tags like this:
```

---

> title: How we built mobile replay

Reviewer 3: I think we should try make the title a little bit more interesting
```suggestion
title: How we built mobile replay (and why it was so hard)
```

date: 2024-09-18
author:
 - ian-vanagas
 - manoel-aranda-neto
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
 - Guides
---

> [Session replay](/session-replay) is one of the most powerful tools for understanding user behavior. Web session replay has been a core part of PostHog for a long time now (it was built in our first hackathon), but mobile teams have had to wait longer.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if we have a link to our hackathon blogs somewhere. Would be nice to add if we do.
```suggestion
[Session replay](/session-replay) is one of the most powerful tools for understanding user behavior. Web session replay has been a core part of PostHog for a long time now (it was built in our [first hackathon]()), but mobile teams have had to wait longer.
```

Fortunately, it's finally here on [iOS](/docs/session-replay/ios), [Android](/docs/session-replay/android), and [React Native](/docs/session-replay/react-native) (with [Flutter](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-flutter/issues/69) coming soon). 

What took so long? Although we had the structure to ingest and playback replays, recording them in mobile apps is much trickier than in web apps. This post goes over why and how we finally managed to overcome them.

## What's so difficult about mobile session replay

Others have complained about [the lack of good mobile replay options](https://medium.com/goodones/15-years-later-there-is-still-no-good-session-replay-for-ios-f8d335999737). Why is that the case?

### 1. Multiple platforms

> The secret about web session replay industry-wide is that it largely relies on a single open source library to work: [rrweb](https://github.com/rrweb-io/rrweb). It includes tools for recording web interactions and state changes, structuring session data, and playback. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The industry's big secret about web session replay is that it largely relies on a single open source library to work: [rrweb](https://github.com/rrweb-io/rrweb). It includes tools for recording web interactions and state changes, structuring session data, and playback. 
```

> Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, we needed to do all the work ourselves, and when compared to the web, this is a lot of work. This is because, instead of a single JavaScript library, language, and SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, React Native, and Flutter). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, we needed to do all the work ourselves, and when compared to the web, this is a lot of work. This is because, instead of a single JavaScript SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, React Native, and Flutter). 
```

That was hard to parse, feels better simpler

> There are even breaking differences within platforms. For example, Jetpack Compose uses a compositional model for UI, different from Android's traditional view-based model. This means you need to develop separate ways of doing replays when using it. iOS has a similar problem with SwiftUI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are even breaking differences within platforms. For example, Jetpack Compose uses a compositional model for UI, which is different from Android's traditional view-based model. This means you need to develop separate ways of doing replays when using it. iOS has a similar problem with SwiftUI versus UIKit.
```

### 2. Performance

> Desktops are a lot more powerful than phones. Because of this, we need to be much more sensitive about performance. 

Reviewer 3: Swapping around so that its clearer what we're referring to in the second sentence
```suggestion
Phones are much less powerful than desktops. Because of this, we need to be much more sensitive about performance. 
```

If you've ever tried to record your phone screen, you would know its impact on performance. Apps take longer to load, animations become choppy, reactivity degrades, and your phone heats up.

> Any that degrades the experience this much is not an option for many developers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Anything that degrades your user experience is not an option for many developers.
```

### 3. Privacy

A big difference between web and mobile apps is the DOM. 

In web apps, this provides a hierarchical tree structure that represents and uniquely identifies elements. The web also has standardized elements, like `<input type="password">`. Combining these makes it easier to identify, mask, and exclude sensitive elements on the web.

> Mobile doesn't have standardized structures or elements. Accessibility identifiers are also inconsistently implemented. This means identifying, masking, and excluding content is a lot more tricky.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mobile doesn't have standardized structures or elements. Accessibility identifiers are also inconsistently implemented. This means identifying, masking, and excluding content is a lot trickier.
```

### 4. Testing

> We're big fans of [dogfooding](/product-engineers/dogfooding) at PostHog. Often, we are our own best users. As you might know, we don't have a mobile app. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're big fans of [dogfooding](/product-engineers/dogfooding) at PostHog. Often, we are our own best users. But, as you may know, we don't have a mobile app. 
```

> During development, we would need to rely on demo and open source apps. We risk creating something that doesn't work well for larger, production-quality apps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This meant that during development we relied on demo and open source apps. This risks creating something that doesn't work well for larger, production-quality apps.
```

Developing a high-quality mobile replay product means relying more on our users and their feedback.

## The prerequisites for mobile session replay

> First, none of this would be possible without [Manoel](/community/profiles/30206). We had mobile experience, but not the dedicated mobile SDK experience needed for this big of a feature. Manoel had that experience and this was only possible thanks to him.

Reviewer 3: The second bit of this paragraph is not super clear tbh. I think we can just remove
```suggestion
First, none of this would be possible without [Manoel](/community/profiles/30206). 
```

> When Manoel joined the first thing he worked on was [rewriting](https://github.com/PostHog/product-internal/issues/506) the SDKs in Kotlin and Swift, removing code we didn't use, improving tests, automating deployments, and making sure they worked with the latest platforms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When Manoel joined the first thing he worked on was [rewriting](https://github.com/PostHog/product-internal/issues/506) our SDKs in Kotlin and Swift, removing code we didn't use, improving tests, automating deployments, and making sure they worked with the latest platforms.
```

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it makes sense to link such internal repos since they are not public anyway, its just a broken link for readers

> We already had the other prerequisite, our existing session replay infrastructure. We had the data structure, the way to store replays, as well as a complete product for playback and analysis. All this could be reused for mobile replay.

Reviewer 3: I dont understand the opening sentence "We already had the other prerequisite, our existing session replay infrastructure"

![Replay](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/replay_03a8c56981.png)

> Importantly, Paul and Manoel realized the mobile data needed to be transformed into a format the rrweb player could use. They wanted to keep the rrweb schema to ensure the fewest changes possible to our API and player. To do this, they wrote a [validation and testing tool](https://github.com/PostHog/mobile-replay-data-transformer) to rapidly test the transformations before deploying it in our main app. 

Reviewer 3: It's a bit confusing to include @pauldambra  here too. Perhaps we can only include Manoel if Paul's okay with it?
```suggestion
Importantly, [Paul[(/link) and Manoel realized the mobile data needed to be transformed into a format the rrweb player could use. They wanted to keep the rrweb schema to ensure the fewest changes possible to our API and player. To do this, they wrote a [validation and testing tool](https://github.com/PostHog/mobile-replay-data-transformer) to rapidly test the transformations before deploying it in our main app. 
```

Reviewer 4: I'm happy to operate in the shadows if it helps clarity, but we both worked on this 🙈

Reviewer 2: Yeah, +1 on including Paul, we did figure out the data schema together but the FE/BE bits were all Pauls PRs.

Once this was done, everything was ready for the mobile replay capture to be worked on. 

> ## How we built mobile session replay

Reviewer 3: I was confused to read the heading, since I thought we were alreadt talking about how we are building this

Maybe my suggestion below works better?
```suggestion
## The process of building it
```

Reviewer 3: Tbh I kind of feel like this section breaks the rhythym of this blog. See comment below on formatting

Work started by developing a [proof of concept](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-android/pull/69) for Android session replay. This developed from sending anything from an Android app and being replayed to basic components like text and images.

![PoC](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/mobile_b85c032c93.png)

From here, there was wireframe capture along with logs and network requests. Afterwards, there were standard Android components like radios, checkboxes, Calendar, [Toggle](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/19279), RatingBar, and more. 

These need to be transformed to render as an HTML wireframe (as rrweb expects). Many of them required custom transformation and components to render properly. For example, radio buttons didn't group, padding wasn't applied, and positioning was wrong.

Beyond this, fitting the data into a service meant for web caused many challenges. For example, click events weren't showing even though the types and data were the same as data that worked. After some investigation, we found that rrweb expects touch events to be associated with specific elements. Setting the ID to the `body` element was enough to fix it.

> Once we got consistent and useful results from what we built, we recruited our first test users and iterated from there. Later, we followed a similar process for [iOS](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-ios/pull/115).

Reviewer 3: See comment below. Maybe this section needs to be moved/redone

> ## Solving mobile replays big problems

Reviewer 3: There's something off about the formatting of this section. We did such a great job outlining the problems we faced, but there isnt a 1-1 matching here (or at least the formatting breaks the rhythym)

Perhaps we turn **Multiple platforms** into its on subheading, and then in the section we include the above section on how we built it in android

e.g this bit and the rest of the section...

> Work started by developing a [proof of concept](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-android/pull/69) for Android session replay. This developed from sending anything from an Android app and being replayed to basic components like text and images.

So how did we solve some of the big problems we identified earlier? Two were relatively simple:

1. **Multiple platforms:** Do the work to develop mobile replay for all the platforms (which is still ongoing).
2. **Testing:** Use open source and test apps to develop a proof of concept. Once complete, use our large user base to find users willing to test our prototype. Luckily, this feature had massive demand and there were users who were willing to try the earliest versions of it.

The other two have more clever solutions. 

### 1. Performance

Not slowing down people's apps was core to our mission with session replay. 

> Our strategy to do wireframes was much less performance-intensive than others tools' reliance on screenshots. We still built screenshot mode, which provided a more accurate representation, but mostly focused on making our wireframe mode as good as possible. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our strategy to do wireframes is much less performance-intensive than others tools' reliance on screenshots. We still built screenshot mode, which provided a more accurate representation. However, we mostly focused on making our wireframe mode as good as possible. 
```

Unfortunately, rrweb for mobile doesn't exist. To build mobile session replay, you simply need to do a lot of work. Instead of a single JavaScript SDK, mobile requires multiple (like iOS, Android, React Native, and Flutter) and all the building and testing that goes with it.

There are even breaking differences within platforms. For example, Jetpack Compose uses a compositional model for UI, which is different from Android's traditional view-based model. This means you need to develop separate ways of doing replays when using it. iOS has a similar problem with SwiftUI versus UIKit.

### 2. Performance

Phones are much less powerful than desktops, and not all phones are a top-of-the-line iPhone. Because of this, we need to be much more sensitive about performance. 

If you've ever tried to record your screen on an older phone, you would know its impact on performance. Apps take longer to load, animations become choppy, reactivity degrades, and your phone heats up.

> Developers don't know what devices their users are on, so they need to be especially careful about performance. Anything that degrades user experience is not an option for many developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers need to support a wide range of devices, so they need to be especially careful about performance. Anything that degrades user experience is not an option for many developers.
```

### 3. Privacy

> To protect users privacy, developers often mask and exclude sensitive information. The tricky part of this is identifying what information is sensitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To protect user privacy, developers often mask and exclude sensitive information. The tricky part of this is identifying what information is sensitive.
```
